Hello everybody, this is a new edition of The Week in Review.
Since last time, this YouTube channel has become the first political channel of this country.
Well, this is not the official audio-visual media's figures yet but we are going forward step by step
and this allows free expression, well at least one that doesn't go through the calamitous filter of official media
So, thank you for your advice, we tried to take it into account all along, until the last one when you told me
"You shouldn't mix The Week in Review with your other messages, you should have a different background." OK, we won't have the same background then.
But obviously, I need this tool to express myself on my way because I don't have time to write as much as I did in the past.
I both write and express myself in videos. Well, we try to organize it all.
Thank you all for the effort that has been made. It's a small victory that we're winning here
and in the end, it will be a huge victory, you'll see.
So, I begin my Week in Review with an event that concerned me : I spoke at the UN organization
and the topic is a mandate coming from the UN on the basis of an Ecuadorian and South African initiative
This mandate is : "Write a treaty for us which constrains multinationals and transnationals to respect human rights,
that is, social, and environmental rights".
It's very important because the idea of imposing a constraining treaty to multinationals has been in the air and in the works for 40 years.
And each time, North Americans and European powers have arranged themselves so that there would be no constraints.
General declarations, sure, no problem.
Calls for volunteering and cooperation, loads of them.
But constraints, never.
And then, frankly, when the proposition from Ecuador and South Africa arrived at the UN,
the powerful thought--they didn't pay attention as much as they should have.
But there was a very good action from the Ecudorian and South African diplomacy which gathered a majority.
Then there was a shock, boom, and a mandate was ordered, and immediately a working group started, a very official structure to prepare the writing of this treaty.
It started really furiously.
North Americans came and said, "we refuse to participate in that thing,"
To find a pretext, they pointed finger at  the president of the working group, Miss Maria Fernanda Espinoza,
who is the ex Defense Minister of Ecuador.
Ecuador as you know is an extremely courageous little country that has participated
in the wave of the democratic revolution
in Latin America.
To the North Americans all of that represents horror personified.
So  they did something incredible. They said as long as it's you who chair
we will not come.
So the others said, "Wait a minute, you don't decide who is the chairman. There are 197 nations who give their opinions."
All of that to tell you how strongly that started.
So obviously the European poodles,
as soon as the US frowned their eyebrows,
hop, they left the room with them.
Only the French stood there looking, "Hollande style" you know, one time "Yes, you saw me" and another time "No, you didn't see me."
And the working group continued
its work, listening, doing auditions, preparing some texts.
At that point came the second session.
Still no Americans there, but Europe is back
and so are the French.
So what do these brave people want?
Well they obtained that be added multinationals and transnationals, as well as, they've asked, ALL companies.
Isn't that extraordinary?
These are people who don't want social harmonization in their own country,
but demand it for the entire planet.
So you understand, it's a kind of overkill from the left
who are asking for more than anyone else.
Naturally it's the best way to bury everything.
The truth is that we have a real interest
in targeting multi-nationals and trans-nationals
because they are the ones who pose a problem...  Which problem?
It's that they don't respond to any law.
A national company responds to national law.
But a multi-national does whatever it wants.
Especially for a decade or two now, or even three, sorry... time flies
since I talked about it for the first time in 1991.
I denounced that,
the private tribunals.
So when two multinationals had a problem between each other,
they didn't go to a tribunal from any country,
they created private tribunals among themselves
which arbitrated between them on the basis of a compound
of Anglo- Saxon laws most of the time.
So they said to each other, "Since that works, we are going to impose it to nations."
So multinationals and transnationals now prosecute nations
before those private tribunals
on a basis which I'm going to summarize with an anecdote.
A transnational says, " Well we've planned to produce X million cigarettes,
yet what we see is that you have invented an anti-tobacco legislation
so we are losing some money.  You owe it back to us."
What I am telling you here is not something out of my imagination, it's what's been done
from one cigarette company to the Australian government.
So you can see the power.
It's a double power.
First power : it's the fact that some companies' sales revenues exceed many times the wealth produced by many countries.
So when they arrive, they have means that many other countries don't have.
And they can ask for compensations that can bankrupt a state.
Can bankrupt it.  Put it on its knees.
The first consequence is that they receive monstrous sums
and sometimes they obtain incredible decisions.
For example in Canada, they prosecuted the Canadian state because the Canadian state had decided to forbid the addition of a product to gasoline.
That product is considered dangerous by the Canadian state for people's health and for engines.
The multinational prosecuted the Canadian government and won!
Not only did the Canadian state have to pay them a compensation for the chemicals they were not able to sell,
but on top of that it had to give up its legislation
that forbids the addition of this chemical product to gasoline.
Did you understand?
It means that they are able, with their financial capacity, to put on their knees even large nations.
That's the first effect.
And the second effect is even more perverted.
It's that when you're about to vote a legislation you're told, " Don't do that, because if you do this or that,
because if you do that, you are going to have this or that multi-national on your back
coming to prosecute you."
So the fear of a complaint keeps back the legislator's hand
who can say for example, " Don't make this law against cigarettes because we'll get the tobacco lobby on our back."
or (like the Germans) "Let's not get out of nuclear energy
or we'll have the nuclear trans-nationals on our back," etc etc....
You see that these are crucial questions.
They come up, along with this working group, exactly the same week
precisely when Wallonie refused to sign the free-trade agreement with Canada,
the famous CETA.
This free-trade agreement,
I've had already had the opportunity to talk about it
as I went to Canada the first time to do my chatting rounds and talk with everybody
to understand how they saw it from the progressive side,
the unions, the environmentalist groups,
the Québecois Party and the other youth associations
and the other political formations of the new generation
who are all opposed to CETA--except for the Quebec sovereignty movement,
with an argument of the kind that only Social Democrats could come up with:
"We're for CETA because it's going to open up Quebec's economy
and open it to the World."
My eye!  How dare you call yourselves sovereignists and
the next second give up your sovereignty
to release it to some arbitration tribunals?  Back to my topic.
The heart of the CETA treaty--beside the fact there are no serious environmental and social guarantees--
the heart is once again these famous arbitration tribunals. So the most conscious people on the planet realize
that accepting the existence of such tribunals,
including it in Treaties,
and giving them a role that supersedes all national legislations
is a change in World History
because it's the end of the history of Democracy.
If you accept that some people may respond to no other legislation than the one that arranges them,
it's a regression, as I said in a UN speech that you can watch, a regression of human civilization
since what we call human civilization is precisely the law-making that applies to a population and to a territory.
So the Wallons refused.  For two days, we were all extremely excited.
And it was doubly exciting.  First because it came from Belgium, an important nation.
In Europe, they were the founders of the EU.  1.b, because it came from the Wallons who have a special place in our affection, us the French.
And thirdly because it showed that one country could block everything.
Which implies, why doesn't our country do it?  Especially given that M. Magnette in Wallonie is a social-democrat and that M. Hollande pretends to be a social-democrat.
Why would the Wallon social-democrat find it bad and have the courage with his province to block it all,
while the other one, who is the president of a very great country, second economic power of the UE, would have nothing to say and find it perfect?
I don't know if you paid attention, but all the beautiful minds from the Parti Socialiste who were opposed to the treaty with the US,
when it came to the treaty with Canada, they found it "nicer" and took an insane amount of time to react to it.
Tough luck, when they finally reacted, the Wallon social-democracy, boom! had surrendered and broken down.
So remember that: whatever they tell you, they surrender.  Whatever they tell you, they end up surrendering.
But I will never surrender.  You must understand that this is the core challenge of the upcoming election.
Because in the next election the confirmation of CETA and the other treaty with the USA will be on the table.
The person you will elect will have to say, in the name of France, yes or no we ratify or we do not ratify.
And I'm letting you know: I will not ratify if you elect me.  I will not ratify and nothing will make me surrender.
This one surrendered.  Well, we need to draw all the lessons.  So he says, "Yes but we obtained..."  By the time he tries to explain, an entire program is gone.
He obtained that the arbitration tribunal will not apply during the intermediary period during which the treaty will be applied without being decided in Europe.
Because believe it or not, that's what we've come to: some treaties get applied before they even get decided upon in Europe.
If you have not yet understood that the EU has become the peoples' straight jacket and a machine to make war in the name of multinationals and transnationals,
then I give up explaining anything, it gets tiring in the end.  Do you understand that from now on, if we apply those treaties, we allow the multinationals and transnationals to do whatever they want?
And you will have no recourse against them.  And your leaders will be like wet chicken at the idea of voting any treaty or any law with a social advantage
because you'll always have one transnational to say, "We're the ones who're being dispossessed."
So folks, this business.  You see, you have both sides.  On one side, CETA, TAFTA, UE, which means globalized free trade, the primacy of free and undistorted competition, circulating merchandise.
And the other aspect is that famous constraining treaty that's being discussed in a UN working group on the initiative of two countries, Ecuador and South Africa,
South Africa, an African state and the place where the history of humanity and civilization began, since it all began in Africa,
and South America, the place where the universe became planetary, the final territory that allowed the encounter of two great movements, European and Asian,
to the detriment of the poor people who happened to be living there, as everybody remembers.
But I find all of that so symbolic, so strong, so meaningful that I wanted to evoke it in this Week in Review.
This week came some news that I find terrible, and I'm sure my listeners feel the same.  It's the report showing that half of the living vertebrates have disappeared in less than 40 years.
Clearly we're getting symptoms and very strong signals that we're in an era of major extinction of living species.
One must read the report summary to realize, but what are the causes?  What provokes this large-scale disappearance?
It's the same thing that provokes waves of epidemics, cancers and diseases of all kinds.
It's the total perturbation of the water cycle.  Most of the massive loss of living species is taking place in freshwater environment, which forms the basis for the water cycle.  Why?
What's happening?  What's causing it?  First, agriculture.
More precisely, the current agricultural model.  And within the current agricultural model, we have to understand that the heart of the model is the production of food--
so food is actually the starting point of this catastrophe.
Not because of you, but because others will decide what you're going to eat
and the conditions in which they will produce what you eat.
So now is when we see things that take us to other aspects of this electoral campaign.
You may remember that a couple of months ago I gave an interview at Gala and spoke of the necessity to phase out of meat protein.
So I came with my quinoa and said we'd better eat vegetable protein.
So I first got on my back all the people who are used to ridiculing everything they see.
So instead of examining what I was saying, they complained, first, that I was on the Gala show, and then along the lines of "Hahaha, Mélenchon, yuppies, quinoa, blah blah."  They didn't listen to the bottom line at all.
The clever ones argued, "yes, but if you all eat quinoa, then the price of quinoa will increase,
so the poor Indians from the Altiplano won't be able to eat quinoa, blah blah blah."
I replied that we produce quinoa in France and we also produce spelt, a variety of plant that can help us get by.
These are all secondary process.
So now we're facing things.  Didn't you get that if you don't change your eating habits, and particularly if we don't phase out of meat protein,
then we're condemned to destroy everything around us, everything.  That's what this about.
It's not the fact I said it on Gala, nor as they say stupidly, "you're trying to steal market shares from the environmentalists."
Everybody should be an environmentalist, but I can tell you that the market share of environmentalists isn't worth much today, and is not today's topic.
Everybody must become an environmentalist and understand the importance of that issue.  It didn't all of a sudden become an issue in the middle of the program.  It's an issue that must be central.
If we don't do anything, the ecosystem is going to be destroyed.
Did you get that, folks?  It's going to be destroyed, right here under your eyes, in the coming years, when it would be so easy to bifurcate.
I want to sweep away another argument -- they really keep pestering with that one -- which is that they tell me, "Yes, but what do you do of the fact that meadows (and I agree with that)
dedicated to cattle farming occupy a very large chunk of agricultural land.
Well, perfect, I never said we must stop eating meat.  If we could, we would.
I'm just saying we need to do things differently and we must stop producing such large quantities and of such a bad quality,
because most the meat that's put on the market is not meat from quality farming, but it's meat resulting from poor animals that were over-exploited beforehand in 1000-cow farms
and from all these miserable creatures that were abused as we know
and whose meat gets sold when they arrive at the end of their cycle.
So it's the entire production line that must be changed.  Neither you nor I ever asked for this kind of farming.  We never asked for that.
We never asked for milk stuffed with antibiotics to come to us.
We never asked for animals to be abused that way.  So we have a right as citizens to demand another agriculture.
We have even more right to say so when we see the catastrophe looming over us because of this kind of methods.
To nail this point, I though it'd be interesting to read the end of the report.
I'll read something that's "pure Mélenchonism" if I believe those who made fun of me.
This is what Arnaud Gauffier says, the man in charge of Agriculture at the WWF.
"If everybody reduced by half a portion their daily consumption of animal protein,
(and don't tell me that not everybody eats meat, I know that)
while increasing their consumption of legumes and cereals,
(hence the importance of developing food crops)
we could reduce by 25% the greenhouse gas emissions linked with food production."
Is that understood?  So, what we explain in the program "L'Avenir en Commun" and the little booklet about ecological "agriculture paysane" that will soon be out
is not, as they say rather contemptuously, "yuppie delusions."  These issues are essential to the survival of humanity
and allow us to initiate an economic logic and an ecologically responsible productive logic that creates employment and decreases our level of predation over nature.
What better can you ask for?  What better do you want?
Something that requires care, gives work and produces quality food.
I wanted to tell you about it because I think the question of protecting our ecosystem must become central in our country's upcoming elections.
It must, because we're a great country with a great economy.
I'm not saying that to be chauvinistic, but it's just to say that when you're very great and very powerful, then you have very great responsibilities.
So the French CAN take the ecological turn, provided of course that they'll be able to plan and organize.  I see I get blamed for "planning" as if I wanted the state to get mixed into everything.  Please, I beg you, no caricature.
"Ecological planning" means bringing together different sectors in order to have a coordinated activity:
education with production, production with the machines we invent, and the processes of production.  That's what "planning" means.
Those who don't plan will not achieve anything.  I propose a "planning" for this transition.
Now I feel reinforced in my idea because I just read a study, also just published and coming from a North-American university,
which argues that the French could reach 100% renewable energy by 2050.
In 2050 I may not be around anymore, not sure, but 2050, all I know is that if we don't start now, we'll never start.
Similarly phasing out of nuclear will take 20-25 years, but every time you postpone the moment you make the decision, you lengthen the delay.
Consequently now is the time to do it. Not in 100 years. Now.  And here comes 2017 and we have electoral ballots to do it.
I find that the current news that come our way, if you know how to sort out what's important from what's secondary, strengthen my point of view.
I'll end with words of humane value.  The evacuation of the Calais jungle is a distressing event
because it's the symbol of all of our failures and our monstrous selfishness and our appalling debasement.
How can the French become prison guards for the British?  Why do we stop these poor people from crossing over to England?
Why do we keep these children from finding their parents again?  That's the question we need to ask, and die of shame for seeing that.
All of it is done in our name.   Shame for seeing so many people die as they attempt to cross the Mediterranean while traffickers are able to keep organizing these massive transits.
And apparently nobody's doing anything about it.  Don't tell me putting thousands of people on boats to cross over the Mediterranean is not prepared ahead, way ahead, by people who are traffickers.
In addition to other factors I've already evoked: war and its brutality, unequal trade agreements.
We live in a time that challenges the deepest core of what we may know of the functioning of a human society.
Yes, human civilization is being questioned.
Not only because its environment is going to be destroyed.  Not only because we're moving toward a generalized war.
But because our own ways of behaving are despicable.
They are the negation of what carried us for millenia.  For millenia, cooperation and the protection of the weakest enabled human civilization to bloom.  And now we're doing all the opposite.  Remember that.
Now if you want to help the existence of this audiovisual moment, you know what to do:  subscribe
and recommend it perhaps to others.  You're welcome to do that.
And thank you all for listening and for your suggestions.  See you soon.